JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight on the
"PBS NewsHour": breakthroughs in
the fight against AIDS, millions
now on lifesaving drugs -- how
early treatment is changing what
was once a death sentence.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Tuesday: boots back on the
ground in Iraq. American
civilians
head to the front lines to fight
against Islamic State militants.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON, Former U.S.
Army Private: Something inside
of me just snapped, and
I couldn't allow myself to sit
down and do nothing, when all of
these children here are
in trouble, and I and me and my
family are just living happily
in America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Plus, our
Running series continues with
former Senator Rick Santorum,
who returns to the campaign
trail for a second bid at the
presidency.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
invoked the Iraq War today
during a defense of the recent
nuclear deal with Iran. He said
those who oppose the deal are
like the people who rushed
the U.S. into war with Iraq.
He spoke in Pittsburgh at the
Veterans of Foreign Wars
national convention.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States: We're hearing
the echoes some of the same
policies and mind-set that
failed us in the past. Some of
the same politicians and pundits
that are so quick to reject the
possibility of a diplomatic
solution to Iran's nuclear
program are the same folks who
were so quick to go to war in
Iraq and said it would take
a few months.
We know the consequences of that
choice, and what it cost us in
blood and treasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The president
also pressed Congress today to
help with funding for the
Veterans Affairs Department.
It's been a little over a year
since the VA was rocked
by scandal over excessive wait
times. He said he's still not
satisfied with the changes
hospitals have made in
fixing veterans' care.
GWEN IFILL: An uncle of the man
who opened fire on military
facilities in Chattanooga,
Tennessee, has been in custody
overseas since a day after the
attack. The uncle of Mohammad
Youssuf Abdulazeez lives in
Jordan, where other relatives
have also been questioned
by authorities. Abdulazeez
spent several months in the
kingdom last year.
In Washington, Republican
Senator John McCain asked the
general tapped to be the next
Army
chief about arming recruiters.
GEN. MARK MILLEY, Army Chief of
Staff Nominee: I think that's
complicated legally, and
there's issues involved
throughout the country.
(CROSSTALK)
GEN. MARK MILLEY: But we will
have to come to grips with that.
And it certainly should
be...
(CROSSTALK)
SEN. JOHN MCCAIN (R), Arizona:
If the legal part of it can be
resolved, do you think that
they should under certain
conditions be armed?
GEN. MARK MILLEY: I think,
under certain conditions, both
on military bails and in
out-stations, recruiting
stations, reserve centers, that
we should seriously consider
it. In some cases, I
think it's appropriate.
GWEN IFILL: President Obama
pledged today the U.S. will do
everything in its power to
protect American military
members from attacks like last
week's.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A prosecutor in
Texas says it's too early to
tell what happened to a
woman who died in police custody
last week. Sandra Bland was
found dead in her jail
cell three days after she was
arrested. Her death was
originally ruled a suicide, but
authorities are now treating the
case as if it were a murder
investigation.
Authorities also released a
surveillance video showing no
movement outside her cell until
medical personnel
arrived on the scene.
GWEN IFILL: Two-term Ohio
Governor John Kasich has become
the 16th Republican to enter
the 2016 presidential race. The
former congressman is known for
his record of fiscal
conservatism.
As chairman of the House Budget
Committee, he helped secure a
balanced budget deal in
1997. Kasich officially
announced his candidacy today at
Ohio State University in
Columbus,
with his family at his side.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate: I will
promise you that my top priority
will get this country on the
path to fiscal independence,
strength, and we will rebuild
the economy of this country,
because creating jobs is our
highest moral purpose, and we
will move to get that done!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
GWEN IFILL: In other campaign
news, Donald Trump lashed out at
fellow Republican presidential
contender Lindsey Graham, who
has been critical of the New
York businessman. Before a
crowd
of about 500 people in South
Carolina, Trump called the
Palmetto State senator a "total
lightweight" -- unquote -- and
read what he said was Graham's
cell phone number aloud
from a piece of paper.
Trump said Graham gave him the
contact information years ago,
when the two were more friendly.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A federal
appeals court in Chicago
overturned some of the most
sensational
corruption convictions of former
Illinois Governor Rod
Blagojevich. He's currently
serving a 14-year sentence after
he was convicted in 2011 of
trying to sell President Obama's
former Senate seat to the
highest bidder. Prosecutors
could appeal the ruling or
decide
to retry Blagojevich
on the dropped counts.
GWEN IFILL: Voters headed to
the polls in small numbers today
in Burundi, where protests
and violence dampened the
turnout. At least two people, a
policeman and a civilian, were
killed in a string of explosions
and gunfire that rocked the
capital overnight. In spite
of that, most polls managed to
open on time. Opposition groups
are boycotting the election
in protest of the current
president's decision to run for
a third term.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A mass funeral
was held in Southeastern Turkey
for victims of yesterday's
suicide bombing in Suruc, near
the border with Syria. Crowds
of mourners wept and
shouted over the flag-draped
coffins as they were laid out;
32 people died and 100 were
injured when the blast ripped
through a rally of young
political activists. Meanwhile,
Turkey's prime minister
announced the suspect had ties
to Islamic State terrorists, but
refrained from identifying
the individual.
GWEN IFILL: Dozens of mayors
and governors from major cities
around the world gathered
at the Vatican today to demand
bold action on climate change.
The summit was designed
to increase pressure on national
leaders ahead of climate
negotiations in Paris later this
year. Last month, Pope Francis
released a landmark
environmental encyclical, urging
the world to do more to fight
human-induced global warming.
JUDY WOODRUFF: New research
suggests older women with mild
memory problems worsen twice
as quickly as men. That was in
a report presented today at an
international conference
on Alzheimer's disease here in
Washington. Women make up
nearly two-thirds of all
Alzheimer's
cases in the U.S., but
scientists say they are still
baffled as to why the disease
disproportionately
affects so many more
women than men.
GWEN IFILL: Stocks fell on Wall
Street today after several
disappointing corporate earnings
reports. The Dow Jones
industrial average lost 181
points to close at 17919. The
Nasdaq
fell more than 10 points and the
S&P 500 slipped nine points.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Still to come on
the "NewsHour": the power of
early treatment for HIV to halt
the spread of AIDS; American
civilians joining the front
lines to fight back ISIS, and
much
more.
GWEN IFILL: Patients, advocates
and scientists are hailing new
studies that show the value
of getting AIDS drugs to
people early and often.
The three-decade-long fight
against AIDS has seen a series
of breakthroughs in recent
weeks,
showing momentum in the push for
an HIV cure. Yesterday, at the
2015 International AIDS
Society Conference in Vancouver,
researchers detailed some
dramatic findings. They
confirmed
that, for people with HIV,
starting treatments with
antiretroviral drugs early did
prevent
AIDS-related illness and deaths.
Until now, there had been
concern that starting such
therapy too early might increase
patients'
risk of cardiovascular and renal
disease. That news came on top
of another surprising
development, as doctors at the
conference described the case of
a French teenager. The
so-far unidentified girl was
born with HIV, and received
antiretroviral treatment until
she was 6. Twelve years later,
she's still free of the virus.
It appears to be the
first confirmed long-term
remission in a child infected
from birth.
MICHEL SIDIBE, Executive
Director, UNAIDS: People were
saying that we were foolish
dreamers, that we
were even naive.
GWEN IFILL: And that followed
word last week that the U.N.
reached its 2015 goal of
providing access to HIV
treatment for 15 million people
worldwide, nine months ahead of
schedule.
MICHEL SIDIBE: And they said it
was too costly. But we have
been able to demonstrate
that they were wrong. And they
were saying that the costs will
never go down.
GWEN IFILL: The report also
said that a once inconceivable
goal, ending the AIDS epidemic,
is in sight by the year 2030.
So let's look closer at the
growth of treatment, the push to
dramatically expand it to
unheard-of
levels and what these drugs have
meant to people coping with the
still-incurable disease.
Deborah Birx is the point person
for the government as the U.S.
global AIDS coordinator. She
joins us from Vancouver, where
the conference is still under
way. And Justin Goforth is
a nurse and director of outreach
for the Whitman-Walker Health
care clinic here in Washington.
He
was diagnosed with
HIV back in 1992.
Dr. Birx let's talk about these
numbers, which are quite
stunning. We're talking about
a 48 percent decrease in HIV
infections in children just
since 2009. That's in 21
priority
countries. What is the
significance of this?
DR. DEBORAH BIRX, U.S. Global
AIDS Coordinator: It really
shows that when we focus and
work
together, we can
achieve amazing goals.
So, under the global plan that
was launched by PEPFAR and
UNAIDS just a few short years
ago, it really mobilized
governments and communities to
really move forward in an
organized and
focused way to have this
dramatic change in the number of
new infections in pediatrics.
GWEN IFILL: Justin Goforth, you
were hands-on every single day
dealing with this for some
years. How has it played out in
a health clinic like yours,
which serves so many people
in a highly affected community?
JUSTIN GOFORTH, Whitman-Walker
Health: It's been quite an
evolution of course with the
technology and
science around HIV.
We really needed to get to a
point that we didn't just have
effective treatments, but
that we had treatments that
could actually be managed within
a daily life of the people
we take care of. And
that's where we're at.
And that's why things are
changing so quickly and it's so
important to pay attention to
the issue, because if you can
get in care and stay in care on
treatment, it is a manageable
chronic illness.
GWEN IFILL: And that's
what's happened with you?
JUSTIN GOFORTH: That's
correct. It's been since 1992.
In, I think, '96, I was taking
at least 40 pills a day. That
was five times a day,
three times a day, had to be
exactly eight hours apart with a
full meal. Nobody eats
like that. Two times a day had
been to be with a completely
empty stomach.
They were effective, but they
were toxic and not really
manageable in people's lives.
And
that's not where we are. Where
we are today is the majority of
the people we take care
of take one pill a day and
manage their illness very
effectively and plan on living
full lives.
GWEN IFILL: Dr. Birx, many of
the findings that you have been
talking about in Vancouver
have to do with children
worldwide, where there has been
great impact over the years,
especially among the youngest.
Tell me about the significance
of how soon you begin to act and
provide this medication
for children.
DR. DEBORAH BIRX: Well, both
children and adults, so it's
been incredibly exciting to
be back in Vancouver.
As you heard there from Justin,
we had 19 years ago in this very
city the announcement
of highly effective treatment.
And for myself and many
clinicians, that was when we
were
actually able to keep our
patients alive. So the patients
that made to it 1996, if
you were in the developed world,
you were able to actually live
effectively. And that
was so extraordinary.
To be back here 19 years later
and here now, through the really
groundbreaking trial that
was done around the world, the
START trial, it says, if we
start people early, they can
live full and productive lives,
no matter where they are. So
that theme of that conference,
which was one hope, one world,
can finally be realized with
this new trial results.
And we are so excited to
translate that science
immediately into programs
through PEPFAR.
GWEN IFILL: You also were --
part of your role, also, Dr.
Birx, was to provide
antiretrovirals
for 15 million people by the
year 2015, and you got there
early. How did that happen?
DR. DEBORAH BIRX: You know,
that is so extraordinary,
because when UNAIDS said that we
were going
to get to 15 -- by 15 in 2011,
everyone was incredibly
doubtful.
And those of us who could really
see the vision were really
excited about translating that
vision into practice. And I
think, through the funding of
the Global Fund and the funding
through PEPFAR, and it's really
-- it's new collaboration and
partnerships with host
governments
and civil society allowed us all
to really sprint in a way we
didn't know we were capable
of doing.
And so to say now that we have
the last piece of the puzzle and
the last tool that will
really allow us to move and move
back into this sprint mode to
really reach people as
quickly as we can, not only with
effective therapy, which, as --
but as what Justin said,
not only effective, but a
therapy that can be utilized as
a community so that people
can stay on treatment and
thrive. And so this really is a
unique opportunity.
GWEN IFILL: Justin Goforth, in
order to treat, in order provide
this therapy, this
wonderful technology, people
have to be willing to take an
early diagnosis as well. Has
that changed over time? The
numbers are not so positive here
in Washington, D.C.
JUSTIN GOFORTH: If you look
over time, our numbers actually
are getting tremendously
better.
I believe we had about 500 new
infections last year, according
to the new data that
was out, and five to 10 years
ago, that was easily 1,000 to
1,500 or for new infections.
So, we have changed the number
of new infections dramatically.
That's really a lot about
getting a lot of people tested,
those folks that HIV-positive
into care.
We have lots of data to suggest
that it's really difficult to
change people's behaviors.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
JUSTIN GOFORTH: But getting
them into care and on treatment
actually doesn't just keep
that person healthy and well for
a life span; it also prevents
them from infecting other
individuals.
That's an historic marriage of
two -- public health prevention
and treatment all coming
together at the same time. And
having a manageable treatment
was necessary to get
to the point that we could
use this as prevention.
And so that's what, I think, is
really see -- we're seeing a
turnaround in the numbers
in all of our urban centers in
the United States, but
particularly here in D.C., where
we used to be seen as the worst
of the worst. That's not the
case actually more with our
new numbers.
GWEN IFILL: Dr. Birx, 2030,
you're talking about getting to
zero. What is the possibility
of that and how
do you get there?
DR. DEBORAH BIRX: Well, we're
talking about ending AIDS as a
public health threat, so
we certainly want all of our HIV
positives, the 37 million people
living with HIV right
now, to know their status and to
thrive and to be on medication
so they can thrive.
To get there to the end is that
we're going to require us to
bring all our prevention
tools to the table and expand
them in an appropriate way in
absolute partnership with the
community,
and I think we have been using
the Whitman-Walker example. You
can see what that clinic and
its community outreach
has been able to do.
We want to translate what the
Whitman-Walker clinic and others
have been able to do in
Washington, D.C., to every city,
every village and every
community around the globe. And
you can see from what we just
heard from Justin, it's
possible.
GWEN IFILL: Dr. Deborah Birx,
U.S. global AIDS coordinator,
and Justin Goforth, the
director of outreach at the
Whitman-Walker Clinic here in
Washington, thank you both
very much.
JUSTIN GOFORTH: My pleasure.
DR. DEBORAH BIRX:
Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tonight: an
exclusive story from Iraq on
American citizens, civilians,
fighting the Islamic State
group. Many are former U.S.
military, but some have never
seen a battle before.
Special correspondent
Marcia Biggs reports.
MARCIA BIGGS: American boots
are back on the ground in Iraq.
This time, they're volunteers,
U.S. military veterans on the
front lines against the Islamic
State, and among them,
one woman; 25-year-old Samantha
Johnston was a private in the
Army for two years before,
she left to be a stay-at-home
mom to her three children.
When the Islamic State
dominating the news
last year, she says she sat in
her North Carolina home,
watching videos of their
atrocities
and felt compelled
to join the fight.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON, Former U.S.
Army Private: Something inside
of me just snapped, and
I couldn't allow myself to sit
down and do nothing, when all of
these children here are
in trouble, and I and me and my
family are just living happily
in America.
MARCIA BIGGS: She made contact
with other volunteers through
social media sites. And
three months ago, she packed her
bags and flew to Iraq, where she
volunteered with the
Kurdish army, the Peshmerga, in
the fight against I.S. She says
she's become close
to the Kurdish soldiers in her
unit, even listing herself on
Facebook by a Kurdish name.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: They became
my family. And I plan to stay
here for as long as I
can, as long as they
need me to be here.
MARCIA BIGGS: She spends her
days training for battle, but
has not yet seen any combat.
Back in her Army days, her job
was making maps for deployed
units, but she never got
the chance to go overseas.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: I really
wanted to be deployed, but my
unit never deployed.
MARCIA BIGGS: Is
that why you're here?
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: Probably.
It's probably one of the many
reasons I'm here.
MARCIA BIGGS: And she's not the
only one. Officials at the U.S.
State Department believe
that more than 150 Americans
have voluntarily traveled to
Iraq and Syria to fight in the
ongoing conflict.
KEITH BROOMFIELD, U.S. Citizen:
I'm here as Gelhat Rumet. I'm
from the Boston area,
from Lynn.
MARCIA BIGGS: Just last month,
36-year-old Keith Broomfield
became the first American
known to die while fighting I.S.
He was killed near the Syrian
town of Kobani.
JEREMY WOODARD, U.S. Military
Veteran: The next village is
right over there. That is
I.S.' home flag.
MARCIA BIGGS: Many of the
volunteers we met are military
veterans, like 29-year-old
Jeremy Woodard, who spent years
fighting in Iraq and
Afghanistan, but struggled back
home.
JEREMY WOODARD: It was hard to
get a job. You barely can get a
job at McDonald's flipping
a burger. They look at you,
they see your resume for serving
in the U.S. Army honorably,
but they look at you like you're
a hazard, you know, you're going
to hurt somebody.
MARCIA BIGGS: When I.S.
fighters swept through Iraq last
summer, Woodard also left family
behind, jumping at the chance to
get involved in the fight, in
honor of his fellow soldiers
who fought and died in
the U.S. war in Iraq.
JEREMY WOODARD: All those
people who got killed over here
for fighting for a cause,
I didn't want them
to die in vain.
MAN: There's been a lot of
intense fighting going on.
MARCIA BIGGS: Woodard's unit
has seen some combat, fighting
alongside the Peshmerga.
Back in April, they established
this defensive line, after a
fierce battle with I.S.
fighters,
a force these volunteers say
is one to be reckoned with.
MAN: We don't recognize them as
terrorists. We actually
recognize them as an actual
Army. They're well-trained,
sophisticated. Whenever they
get into battle, it's well
-- very disciplined manner.
MARCIA BIGGS: Despite never
serving in the military, Danny
was one of the volunteers
who was wounded in that
battle, shot in the leg.
MAN: Are you ready
to die for this?
MAN: Am I ready to die for
this? Well, I have been out
here for the last seven months
already. I pretty much made up
my mind to go ahead and help out
these people, help out
those people that aren't able to
help themselves. So, if that
will be a matter of fact to
do so, then, hey,
it is what it is.
MARCIA BIGGS: The volunteers
say they're here out of moral
obligation. They're not
even being paid. And while it's
not technically illegal, the
U.S. State Department is adamant
that it doesn't support their
participation in this conflict.
But for these Americans,
it wasn't even a question.
JUSTIN SMITH, U.S. Military
Veteran: I'm having a great
time out here. I feel more
comfortable here than I
ever felt in America.
MARCIA BIGGS: After serving in
Iraq, Justin Smith says he
suffered from post-traumatic
stress disorder. Several
attempts at treatment failed,
and he finally sold everything
he
owned to buy a one-way ticket
back. He says Iraq seems like
paradise compared to the hell
of staying in the U.S.
JUSTIN SMITH: In the States,
there is too much idle time, too
much time just doing nothing
or sitting around and drinking,
or anything like that. It's
better here. Like I have
said countless times, I get
to do my job. I love my job.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you think you
can ever go back to the U.S.?
JUSTIN SMITH: Probably. I
mean, I won't like it, but I
will have to go back eventually.
MAN: I don't think I
could leave for good.
MARCIA BIGGS: While the
Peshmerga doesn't officially
allow foreigners to volunteer,
local authorities often look the
other way when volunteers
arrive. And they have been
largely embraced, sometimes
simply out of Kurdish
hospitality.
But one Kurdish officer told us
that, while he appreciates the
volunteers, this is not
what they need from
the United States.
MAN: We don't need exactly
people to come fight for us. We
need weapons. We need
equipment, supplies from
American government, from the --
from different countries.
MARCIA BIGGS: We asked Jeremy
why he thinks it's his business
to fight in a war that the
U.S. is not directly waging.
JEREMY WOODARD: It should be
everybody's business. If it
doesn't get stopped over
here, it's going
to keep spreading.
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you think
there are so many ISIS sleeper
cells in the United States?
JEREMY WOODARD: I believe it.
I think there's quite a few.
MARCIA BIGGS: Why
do you believe that?
JEREMY WOODARD: I mean, that's
a good question. I mean, they
keep claiming that they're
there. I mean, who knows. It's
a possibility that they're not.
But, honestly, I believe
that they are.
MARCIA BIGGS: So why not be in
the us searching out sleeper
cells?
JEREMY WOODARD: I mean, this is
where the fight is right now.
It's got to get controlled
here.
MARCIA BIGGS: Johnston faces a
firestorm of controversy over
leaving behind her 5-year-old
and her 3-year-old twins to
volunteer in a war on the other
side of the world, where
we're told I.S. fighters have
put a $300,000 price on her
head.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: I see these
refugee children. I see just
the normal poor children here,
and I think of my children. And
my children are happy. They're
safe. They're fed.
They have more than they
need. And they're OK.
MARCIA BIGGS: You said, "My
kids have everything they need,"
but they don't have their mom.
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: They don't,
but I will spend the rest of my
life making that up to
them.
MARCIA BIGGS: You cried all
the way to the airport?
SAMANTHA JOHNSTON: I don't want
to think about it. That was the
hardest day of my
life. I will never leave them
again when I come back, never.
Every day is a battle not to
come back. Every day, I -- I
look at prices to fly back. But
I have a -- I have a goal here,
and I can't just give up.
MARCIA BIGGS: It's a goal and a
cause they all believe in. But
it's also an escape.
JEREMY WOODARD: It's an escape,
yes. It's like a vacation here.
It's kind of sick
to say. After I graduated, I
went straight to the Army. I
was 17 when I went in. And
I just know war. That's it.
I'm still searching. Searching
for what, I don't know,
searching for a part of myself,
where I belong. I belong
in a place like this.
MARCIA BIGGS: For those still
searching, the fight against
I.S. provides yet another
war.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I am
Marcia Biggs in Northern Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Since our
interview, Samantha Johnston
left Iraq for Europe and posted
on
her Facebook page that, although
it is -- quote -- "time to start
heading back to my family,"
she indicated that she
will be returning to Iraq.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead on the
"NewsHour": the increasing
numbers of children living
in poverty since the great
recession; and how one family's
premature baby sparked a
larger debate on
employer-provided insurance and
the right to privacy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the next in
our series of interviews with
the candidates running
for president in 2016.
Tonight, we sit down with former
U.S. Senator Rick Santorum of
Pennsylvania, who made a
run for the Republican
nomination in 2012, and he is
trying again.
Welcome, Senator Santorum.
RICK SANTORUM (R), Presidential
Candidate: Thank you, Judy.
Good to be with you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, we were just
listening to that report about
Americans joining the
fight against ISIS.
To you, what's the greater
threat to this country, ISIS or
Iran?
RICK SANTORUM: I think ISIS is
the more near-term threat,
obviously the jihadis that
they encourage to attack here in
the United States and obviously
the hot war that's going
on in the Middle East.
But, clearly, the long-term
threat is Iran, and I have been
saying that really for the
better part of 12 years. When I
was in the Senate, I authored
bills on sanctioning Iran.
I was talking about their
nuclear program and how an
Iranian nuclear program is
really
the worst possible thing that
can happen to this country.
There really isn't any more
threat that's more dangerous,
that's more existential than
Iran with the ability to
use a nuclear weapon, maybe use
it as an EMP, use it as a dirty
bomb, use it through terrorists,
whatever the case may be.
I have no doubt that, unlike
other nuclear powers, Iran is a
country that is driven by
a theocracy that will use that
nuclear weapon against America.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And all your
Republican opponents agree with
you on that. They don't like
that deal either.
However, Senator Scott -- or
Governor Scott Walker is saying
that, on the first day he
became president, he would be
willing to go to war against
Iran if necessary. Do you
agree with him on that?
RICK SANTORUM: I have very,
very clear from the very
beginning of looking at Iran,
and
looking at their theology,
looking at what their objective,
looking at what they say.
One of the things we should have
learned from history, we should
have learned from history,
is actually pay attention to
what leaders say they're going
to do, because sometimes
and many times, when they're
given the capability, they
actually do it.
And if you listen to what Iran
is saying -- and even just the
other day -- where they talk
about we're going to rule
America, we're going to wipe out
America, we're going to destroy
America, now we're giving them
the capability. I mean, there
is no doubt, with this plan,
we are putting them on a path to
have the capability to do just
that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And so
what about going to war?
RICK SANTORUM: The answer is,
if I -- when I become president,
from the day after I get
-- I'm elected president, I will
be working with our allies.
I have no doubt, no doubt that
Iran will be in violation of
this agreement multiple times
by the time I'm
elected president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, in the
last presidential election --
let's talk about that -- you ran
a strong campaign. You came in
second to Mitt Romney, a distant
second, but you came
in second.
RICK SANTORUM: Won 11 states.
That's pretty respectable.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This year, you
not only are running against
more candidates. You're
running against more people who
are committed conservatives,
people like Mike Huckabee,
like Ted Cruz, Ben
Carson, Scott Walker.
What does Rick Santorum
bring that they don't?
RICK SANTORUM: Well, I would
say several things, number one,
experience on national
security, which is a huge deal.
This is an issue I have been
wrestling with now with eight
years on the Armed Services
Committee, a lot of experience
in this area, someone who has
got a track record and is
prepared to lead.
And, you know, three months ago,
I was in ISIS magazine, on the
American version, under
the title, "In the Words of Our
Enemy," and had a picture of me
and a quote from me. The
enemy knows who I am. I know
who they are. And I think at a
time when our country is
facing this kind of severe
threat, having someone with
experience in this area is
important.
Second, I announced from a
factory floor in Western
Pennsylvania. And I think our
message
of bringing manufacturing back
to this country, helping
blue-collar Americans and lower-
and
middle-income Americans have
good-paying jobs and be able to
rise, it's going to be -- and
our platform of how we're going
to do that is different than
everybody else in the field.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Senator, at
this point, you know all of
these people I have named
and others are running ahead of
you in the polls. If you don't
make that cut to be
the 10 candidates on the stage
for that first debate that FOX
News is sponsoring in a couple
of weeks, what are
you going to do?
RICK SANTORUM: I will keep
going back to Iowa and keep
hustling and campaigning.
What I found out -- four years
ago, we had a straw poll in
Iowa. I finished fourth,
almost fifth, and it didn't have
very much impact. The person
who won didn't win a
delegate. The person who came
in with tens of millions of
dollars and was at the top
of the polls this time four
years ago didn't win a delegate.
The guy that win a bunch of
delegates, I was the person who
really focused on what the
goal is. And the goal is not
polls in February -- in --
excuse me -- in July, but
results
in February.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let's
talk some issues.
John Kasich, as you know,
announced today. He became the
16th Republican to jump in
the race. He's putting a lot of
emphasis on income inequality.
There's a new report
out by the Annie E. Casey
Foundation that says 22 percent
of American children today
are living in poverty.
First of all, do you accept that
number, and, second, what would
you do about it?
RICK SANTORUM: I would suspect
that the vast majority of those
22 million kids living
in poverty are living in...
JUDY WOODRUFF:
Twenty-two percent.
RICK SANTORUM: Twenty-two
percent -- excuse me -- living
in poverty are living in broken
homes.
If you -- I'm actually one of
the few politicians who walks
around holding up two books at
my
town hall meetings, one, Robert
Putnam, a liberal sociologist
from Harvard, and Charles
Murray, a libertarian with the
American Enterprise Institute,
and talk about those two books
from the far left
and the far right.
I think both come down to the
same conclusion, that the reason
the middle is hollowing out,
the reason people aren't able to
rise is fundamentally a
breakdown in the family
structure in America
and the consequence of that.
And, as you know, I'm someone
who has really focused long and
hard for a lot of years.
I wrote a book 10 years ago
called "It Takes a Family." And
what we need to do as a society,
and to some degree even as a
government, to try to help
reknit the American family.
And so I agree with John Kasich.
That's a big issue. I agree
that there's -- that
children's ability to rise in
America today is not what it
should be and not what we should
expect in America. And we have
got some really solid ideas to
create a stronger economy,
as well as to try to help
stabilize and support stronger
families.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Immigration.
After Donald Trump made his
announcement that he was running
for president and he spoke about
Mexican immigrants bringing
drugs and crime and being
rapists,
you did say later that you
didn't agree with him, but it
took you two weeks to come out
and make a statement.
RICK SANTORUM: No, I made a
statement, actually, whenever I
was asked about it.
I did disagree with what he
said, but I agree that the issue
is an important issue to be
discussed. And, in fact, I was
-- I'm the only person in this
race who's actually put
out a comprehensive plan on
immigration control that deals
with both illegal and legal
immigration.
And there's -- there are a lot
of -- again, to me, it goes
with, how are we going to create
a better opportunity for
lower-skilled workers in
America, many of those poor
children you're
talking about, who are not going
to be able to go to college?
How are we going to create
the opportunity for them
to rise in society?
And so we have put together not
just an economic plan that deals
with a whole host of things,
including, by the way,
increasing the minimum wage,
which I'm one of the few
Republicans
that is in favor of, but also an
immigration plan that says let's
quit bringing over a
million legal immigrants a year,
as well as hundreds of
thousands, if not millions
illegal
immigrants, almost all of whom
are unskilled, into this country
to compete against the workers
right now who see their wages
flatlining and the opportunity
for them to rise decreasing
in America.
And so you can look at the
immigration issue, and we have,
according to the number, 35
million
legal and illegal immigrants
have come into this country in
the last 20 years. That
can be a good thing
or a bad thing.
But the idea that you can't have
a discussion about whether this
-- whether we should limit
immigration because that makes
you xenophobic or jingoistic is
wrong. We need to look
at it from the standpoint of
what's best for the economy and
what's best for the American
worker.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We don't have
time to discuss it now, but we
know more Mexicans are leaving
the country now to go back
to Mexico than are coming.
RICK SANTORUM: Yes.
In fact, the majority of -- the
majority of people that are
coming into this country
illegally
now are visa overstays. They're
not Mexicans coming across the
border. You're right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Senator
Rick Santorum, thank you for
talking with us.
RICK SANTORUM: My pleasure,
Judy. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Appreciate it.
GWEN IFILL: The economy may be
recovering from the great
recession, but a new report
finds many have been left
behind, especially children.
The findings from the Annie E.
Casey Foundation show 22 percent
of U.S. children were living
in poverty in 2013. That's
compared to 18 percent in 2008.
Those rates were nearly
double among African-American
and Native American children,
with problems most severe in the
South and the Southwest.
Some of those conclusions also
echo a recent analysis by the
Pew Research Center. It
found black children were almost
four times as likely as white
children to be living in
poverty.
Joining me to discuss the cause
and the effect of these sobering
numbers are Patrick McCarthy,
the president and CEO of the
Annie E. Casey Foundation, and
Mark Hugo Lopez of the Pew
Research Center.
Mark Hugo Lopez, why these
populations in particular, why
are they suffering?
MARK HUGO LOPEZ, Director of
Hispanic Research, Pew Research
Center: Well, when you take
a look at unemployment rates
particularly, you will see that,
for African-Americans in
June, unemployment was 9.6
percent. For whites, it was 4.5
percent.
That almost -- the unemployment
rate for African-Americans is
almost double that of whites.
And that's
an important part of explaining
the story of why many children
live in poverty. Many
of their parents either are not
fully employed, are unemployed
or can't find work.
GWEN IFILL: Now, Patrick
McCarthy, some people might
think this wasn't surprising.
We know in some ways that
minority populations are at a
disadvantage, yet when you look
at
the numbers overall, in fact,
fewer white children are in
poverty.
Why are the numbers heading in
the wrong -- opposite
directions?
PATRICK MCCARTHY, President and
CEO, Annie E. Casey Foundation:
Well, I think there's
a number of reasons that
we have to look at here.
The economy, as it's
recovered, certainly
has produced jobs for some
populations, but we know that
the recession took out a lot
of lower-skilled jobs and
low-wage jobs that had been held
by African-Americans and
Latinos.
And as the economy has
recovered, although a lot of the
jobs that had been restored are
low-wage jobs, the folks who
lost their jobs, who have had
kind of a precarious grasp of
those jobs, are having a much
harder time getting employed
again.
GWEN IFILL: Well, here's one
thing which struck me, which is
that we're not talking
just about percentages. Right?
We're talking absolute numbers.
MARK HUGO LOPEZ: That's right;
14.7 million children live in
poverty.
And when you take a look at the
Hispanic children in poverty,
that number is about five
million.
For black children, those
numbers are about 4.2 million.
So, really, when we're talking
children in poverty, a
significant share, more than
half, are either black or
Hispanic
children.
But we're also seeing some other
big changes. As you noted, the
number of white children
living in poverty has declined.
It looks like it might even be
below the number of
black children in poverty, which
would be a first in at least 30
or 40 years. And
for Hispanics, there are more
Hispanics living in poverty.
And that's been the case since
2007, particularly for children.
GWEN IFILL: Patrick McCarthy,
let's talk about two states.
PATRICK MCCARTHY: Sure.
GWEN IFILL: Mississippi,
Minnesota.
Mississippi is the worst state
by these measures, and Minnesota
is the best. What's the
difference?
PATRICK MCCARTHY: Well, there
are a lot of differences that go
into this.
Obviously, there are kind of
large macroeconomic differences
between the two states. They
have very different economies.
We know that, just as we have
been discussing,
African-American
families in particular are
suffering after the recession.
Mississippi has a much higher
number of African-American
families living in Mississippi
compared to Minnesota.
We actually think also that
there are differences in how
states made policy choices. We
know
not only Minnesota but a number
of states in the Northeast and
Midwest have made their
policy choices. We know that
not only Minnesota, but a number
of the states in the Northeast,
the Midwest, have made choices
around providing health care,
providing early childhood
education,
providing a bridge to jobs,
providing supports for folks who
do become unemployed, and that
makes a difference as well.
So it's partially the economic
forces at play, the kinds of
jobs that are available in those
states, and it's partially the
policy choices that states make.
GWEN IFILL: So, a policy
choice, for instance, might be
prizing deficit reduction over
social
welfare programs.
MARK HUGO LOPEZ: That's right,
and social welfare programs
that, say, might even be
focused on children.
So, some states have done some
policy choices, as Patrick has
noted, that have been
emphasizing
more broadly what's happening in
the state and less so to help
children particularly.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about
the long-term effect of these
kinds of numbers, first of
all, educational attainment.
PATRICK MCCARTHY: So, one of
the things that I think we
sometimes miss when we talk
about the numbers, and they seem
so large, and talk about
percentages, is we lose what
it means to be in poverty, the
day-to-day grind of not being
sure you're going to be
able to take care of your kids,
the inability to find a job that
you can rely on week after
week after week, having to
figure out at the end of the
month do you pay this bill or
that
bill, the kind of stress that
takes on you as not only a
worker and as an individual,
but as a parent, which then
begins to affect the children.
They're living in an environment
where there's a lot of stress.
Put on top of that the
fact that one in seven American
children are living in
neighborhoods of high poverty,
so
they're surrounded by other
people who are struggling with
the same kinds of issues,
often with poor schools, the a
safe place to play, surrounded
by crime.
Then you start to see the
long-term effects of that on
children, trauma, chronic
stress,
et cetera, that literally starts
to narrow their opportunity,
make it tougher for them
to be successful in school,
long-term research showing
impacts even on their health as
they
become adults. So poverty is
the driver of many, many of the
social ills that this
country faces.
GWEN IFILL: What would
you add to that?
MARK HUGO LOPEZ: When we take a
look at the long-running effects
of poverty, particularly
when it comes to, say, labor
market opportunities, what are
these young people going to be
trained
for? What sort of jobs will
they be able to hold? And when
it comes to completing
college, for many of them, they
may end having to try to work to
help to support their parents
or their other siblings who are
still under the age of 18.
So, poverty could put a lot of
stress, particularly when you
think about Hispanic children,
many
of them who go on to college say
that one of the reasons why they
do not stay in college
is because they have got to
return home to help family.
GWEN IFILL: What are the policy
solutions, if there are any, if
this is identified to
be a major problem?
PATRICK MCCARTHY: So, we think
there are three things that we
ought to look at. And
we need to start with thinking
about a two-generation strategy,
by which we mean simultaneously
investing in families and
parents and in the children
themselves.
So the three things that we
think you need to do is, number
one, recognize we're in a
transitional economy, and so
it's tough for especially folks
without a lot of skills to
make enough money to support
their families. So, we have got
to think about things like
expanding the Earned Income Tax
Credit, the child tax credit,
recognizing the importance
of unemployment benefits and
other supports for families, so
they can have the economic
means to take care
of their kids.
Second, we have to recognize
they are both workers and they
are parents, so we have got
to help them have the social and
emotional skills they need to do
right by their kids.
And, third, we need to invest
heavily, in my view, especially
for children who are in
poverty, in early childhood
programs, in quality preschool,
in quality early education, so
they get on that path
towards opportunity.
GWEN IFILL: Patrick McCarthy,
president and CEO of the Annie
E. Casey Foundation,
and Mark Hugo Lopez of Pew
Research Center, thank you both
for the numbers and the story
behind the numbers.
MARK HUGO LOPEZ: Thank you.
PATRICK MCCARTHY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: when one
family's personal drama sparked
national headlines.
Deanna Fei premature baby girl
had survived a long, arduous
stay in the hospital, when
she and her family were thrust
into controversy. It happened
when the CEO of AOL, where her
husband worked, said he would
cut benefits for all workers
because of high medical costs
for cases like hers.
She describes the experience in
a new memoir called "Girl in
Glass: How My 'Distressed
Baby' Defied the Odds, Shamed a
CEO, and Taught Me the Essence
of Love, Heartbreak, and
Miracles."
William Brangham talked with her
recently in Brooklyn, New York.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Deanna Fei
was just 25 weeks pregnant, hard
at work on her second
novel and months away from her
delivery date. She'd been
researching translations for
a plot twist where one of her
main characters would have a
miscarriage.
That night, her own contractions
came out of nowhere. Rushing to
the hospital with
shooting pains in her womb, the
translation of the word
"calamity" was still on her
computer
screen.
DEANNA FEI, Author, "Girl in
Glass: How My 'Distressed Baby'
Defied the Odds, Shamed
a CEO, and Taught Me the Essence
of Love, Heartbreak, and
Miracles": The pain just
got worse and worse and worse.
And I found myself desperately
thinking, like, could this
be Braxton Hicks contractions,
you know, the false labor?
But it felt nothing like that.
And by the time I got to the
hospital, I was fully dilated.
And the doctors had to perform
an emergency C-section.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Nothing in
Fei's own history predicted a
calamity like this. She and
her husband, Peter Goodman, had
always been the lucky types,
traveling the world together,
pursuing careers in
writing and journalism.
During a trip to India in 2010,
they made an offhand prayer to
the Hindu gods to bless
them with their first child, and
nine months later, a chubby boy
named Leo was born, healthy
and right on time. This second
pregnancy, which was a surprise,
came almost a year after
Leo's birth and had been going
just as well, until those pains
started.
DEANNA FEI: All that was in my
head was, I think I lost my
baby. I had a miscarriage.
And when the nurses and doctors
said things like,
congratulations, would you like
to take
a picture of her, I almost felt
like it was a kind of farce.
And both my husband and
I had this feeling of, this
isn't how a baby gets born.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She was a
baby girl, weighing just one
pound, nine ounces, barely a
quarter
of her brother's birth weight.
One doctor described her skin as
-- quote -- "gelatinous."
Because she'd arrived so
early, she had few of the normal
functions or immunities babies
develop in utero, so
she had to live enclosed in this
glass incubator in a neonatal
intensive care unit. Her
parents
were even reluctant to
give her a name at first.
DEANNA FEI: She was really hard
to look at. I mean, everything
about her to me felt
like, I don't know if she's
supposed to be here. And I
don't know if she's going to
be here, because what we also
heard from the beginning, along
with the congratulations,
was, she might not survive one
month, one week, one day.
There was a part of me that felt
like, it's kind of the mother in
me thinking, like, do
I need to let her go? Is it
selfish to hold onto this idea
of this baby, when maybe she
just isn't meant to survive?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Even though
the next days only got worse --
there was bleeding in her
brain, and then a collapsed lung
-- they did name her. They
called her Mila. Hope started
setting in.
PETER GOODMAN, Husband of Deanna
Fei: When we realized that we
could put our hand inside
the incubator and give her
access to my pinkie finger, and
she would squeeze it and hold
on, once I got to see her eyes
and realized that she looked a
lot like our boy, and once
I started to see her really
fight for her own life, I mean,
the nurses said day one
-- and I thought, you must be
making this up for my benefit --
she's really feisty,
they said.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Three weeks
in, Fei was able to hold Mila
for the first time.
At week nine, Mila breathed
without life support. And a
month later, she was going home.
She
was three months old. Once
there, she seemed to thrive,
hitting all her major
milestones,
and showing no signs of the
brain damage some premature
babies experience.
Goodman was back at work. He
was an editor at The Huffington
Post, which is owned by
AOL, when some corporate news
broke that hit very close to
home.
Tim Armstrong, AOL's CEO,
announced he had to trim his
employees' retirement benefits
because of high health insurance
costs, but who he blamed for
those costs sparked a media
frenzy.
Armstrong said quote: "We had
two AOL-ers that had distressed
babies that were born
that we paid a million dollars
each to make sure those babies
were OK in general. So,
when we had the final decision
about what benefits to cut
because of the increased health
care costs, we made the
decision, and I made the
decision, to basically change
the 401(k)
plan."
PETER GOODMAN: It was clear
that he was talking about my
kid. And friends of mine
in the newsroom came through in
the course of the day and they
said, somewhat embarrassed,
he's talking about
your kid, isn't he?
DEANNA FEI: It sounded
extremely dehumanizing, and it
had no relation to the daughter
who
was in front of me. She had
actually started taking her
first steps just that week.
And that was a huge milestone
for us, because, of course,
every milestone brought so many
new worries, where every time
she achieved one milestone, we
should start to worry, is
she ever going to do the next
one? You know, once she crawls,
is she ever going to cruise?
If she cruises, will she ever
walk? And then she took her
first steps and then this
happened, and all of the trauma
just kind of came rushing back
to me.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The couple
felt shamed, then angry. Fei
channeled her anger into
a blistering piece in Slate
called "My Baby and AOL's Bottom
Line."
She wrote: "Our daughter has
already overcome more setbacks
than most of us have endured
in the span of our lives.
Having her very existence used
as a scapegoat for cutting
corporate benefits was
one indignity too many."
DEANNA FEI: There was the
implication that we had used
more than our fair share of
health
benefits. There was the
implication that somehow her
care was optional, because Tim
Armstrong portrayed her as this
outsized burden on the corporate
balance sheets. And he
also implied that the company
had done more than it needed to
do in paying for her care.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Armstrong,
who declined to comment for this
story, did call Goodman
and Fei to apologize, and he
eventually reversed the decision
to reduce his employees' 401(k)
plans.
But Goodman was done with the
company. He left AOL for The
International Business Times.
After her piece in Slate went
viral, Fei started hearing from
others who'd been blamed
by their bosses for having
costly medical care, things like
cancer treatment or major
surgeries.
DEANNA FEI: The truth is, until
recently, I was one of those
people whose eyes would
glaze over at a term
like health privacy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Deanna's
book, "Girl in Glass," is both a
memoir and an impassioned
plea to not let what happened
to her family happen to others.
DEANNA FEI: These are risks
that are extraordinary for any
individual family, but they are
completely
predictable in the aggregate.
And that's the point of health
insurance.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Lawrence
Gostin is a professor of global
health law at Georgetown
University.
He says employers should never
blame or embarrass employees who
get sick or even be in a
position
to do so.
LAWRENCE GOSTIN, Georgetown Law:
The lesson is that you have no
business knowing the
confidential
health information of your
employees, that you should make
sure that there's a strong
firewall between you, as the
employer making employment
decisions, and health care
decisions
and health insurance decisions.
That needs to be separated, and
that comes to me loud and clear.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Fei and
Goodman also say employees need
to demand their rights to
privacy,
just as Mila, who is now 2, is
learning to demand what she
wants. And it's chocolate
ice cream.
Mila has continued to grow and
thrive and has so far shown none
of the ill effects Fei
or any parent of a premature
child worry about.
DEANNA FEI: You know, these
days, I think it is hard to
escape this term that I hated
when she was first born, which
is the term miracle child,
because we were just hours
removed from her birth, and
hearing all the odds against
her, when people would come to
us and say, oh, well, she will
be a miracle, she's going to be
your miracle child. Just
wait and see.
And I finally reached a point
where I have to say, you're
right. She is. She's amazing,
and no one can take that away
from her. She's earned that.
If anyone has earned that label,
she has earned it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: She's still
young, so Mila may face health
challenges in the future.
It's hard to tell at this point.
But for a story that began in
catastrophe, Mila's
parents are glad this chapter
of their lives is a happy one.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham in Brooklyn,
New York.
GWEN IFILL: Tonight on
"Frontline": a detailed look
inside Mexico's largest drug
cartel.
The drug kingpin Joaquin "El
Chapo" Guzman recently escaped
from a maximum security prison.
He escaped once before in 2001,
and prior to his capture in
2014, two filmmakers explored
his brutal drug empire. In
their quest for an interview,
they met his mother and visited
his home.
MAN: Only one person could have
arranged for us to have lunch
with Mrs. Guzman. Two
hours later, we were being
driven up the mountain to a
place they call heaven on his
direct
instructions.
MAN (through translator):
Where are we?
MAN: Nothing. Basically, they
said that -- basically, they
said that he's not going
to speak with us right now. He
said, yes, but not now. And it
feels funny, because
we can certainly feel that he's
around here, and they called him
on a mobile phone. And,
yes, so he must be around.
MAN: Can't he just have been
politely telling us to go away?
MAN: No, because the style of
these people is, if they say no,
it's, no, thank you very
much. They don't play around
like that. Certainly, it's not
in their interest that
we come up here a lot. We can
bring trouble with us. So, you
know, that's what I believe.
MAN: So he is somewhere between
his birthplace and Culiacan?
That's what...
MAN: Yes, they say that he
spends most of his time around
here and Culiacan.
MAN: That's weird, isn't it?
It's the most obvious place for
him to be.
MAN: Yes, possibly the safest.
MAN: Over the following months,
we were twice more invited up to
La Tuna. Each time,
El Chapo decided not to go on
camera. For all the
disappointment, we had found him
exactly
where we had expected him to be.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Frontline" airs
tonight on most PBS stations.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
On Wednesday, we will profile a
Nazi hunter and talk with the
former concentration camp
guard he's trying
to put behind bars.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.